#summary How to use the Ornagai mobile dictionary creator applet.
#labels Phase-Support

= Introduction =

Dictionaries for the ornagai-mobile project tend to be big. The default dictionary contains 30,000 definitions, and is bigger than all the remaining code combined. Moreover, storing lookup information for this dictionary would take well over 10mb of space --far too much for most low-end phones. 

Hence, we must optimize a dictionary before we transfer it to a phone. The Ornagai Dictionary Creator exists to help you with this task.

= Instructions =

  * First, download the latest Ornagai Creator from the Downloads page. For example:
    * http://ornagai-mobile.googlecode.com/files/ornagai_creator_1.1.zip
  * Unzip this file into one directory.
  * Browse to that directory, and click on the "index.html" page. 
  * The "index.html" page will load in your browser, and it will describe how to use the program. Follow its instructions
  * Your dictionary file will need to be in a suitable format. Please see the basic english dictionary for an example:
    * http://ornagai-mobile.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/resources/dictionary_sep09/basic_english_wordlist.txt
  * After your dictionary has been built, you can upload it to your phone. (There is a separate wiki page describing how to do this).

 
= Dealing with Errors =

The Ornagai Creator was tested extensively, and used to create several real-life dictionaries including the default one. However, there might still be a few bugs. Please contact us if you have any trouble creating a custom dictionary.


= Dictionary Sizes =

Custom dictionaries can be quite big. Please be reasonable; adding too many words or very long definitions can make the ornagai-mobile program run very slowly on some phones.


= Character Support =

Currently, only Burmese is supported. A lot of re-writing would have to take place to support other languages. (We hope to add this support eventually, but right now it is not possible.)